So we talked about
the if keyword before to
perform certain statements based on
an expression that you typed in brackets.
I wanna talk to you now
about the switch statements.
So let's get started.
On that.
The first is, you just want to ensure
that you configured IntelliJ correctly.
So go into configure in this
opening screen of IntelliJ,
before you've got a project open.
Click on configure go to project
defaults and click on project structure.
And you want to make sure this
override is set to eight.
And that's because we're actually going
to be using features that were introduced
into the version seven.
You can see on the screen there,
but for future reference,
because we are ultimately going
to be using java eight features.
We're going to set that to eight, so
make sure that's set to eight, and
create a new project.
We're going to call it Switch, so
I'm going to select
the standard defaults here.
We're gonna call it switch as I mentioned.
Incidentally, if you've already created
a project you want to know how to set so
it uses that JDK eight feature that
I showed you in the project default.
I'll show you how to do that now.
So go to the file menu.
Click on Project Structure, and
you'll set that to version eight.
Click on OK.
Okay, so
let's make a bit of space as we always do.
So the switch statement.
So again talking about this,
we've seen the if statement used before.
We can start off with an integer,
value equals one.
You've seen something like
this if value double equals
one, One.
Or else if value equals two.
Else was not one or two.
So you see in a simple example there and
if we run that,
in this case we should get the value one.
And we can change that to a two,
run it again.
Through the value of the two.
In the value two as you can see there of
course when we specify three which we
get neither.
While it was not one or two.
So, nothing K unique about that.
Now this can get a little bit messy, you
got ten values to test or a large number
of values you want to test and perform
different code for based on that value.
There is an alternative and
that's using the switch statement.
So let's do something equivalent to the
equivalent to what we've done above but
using a switch statements.
We're gonna put int, we call it switch
value and we'll set that to one again.
The switch statement is comprised
of the switch keywords, so
it's switch and
the value that we wanna test.
The actual variable name or
expression, so put switch value.
And then we put,
start a code block, like so.
And what we do then,
we then type the word case.
And what we want to test for, so
in this case, we want to test for
the literal value of one, so
I put one and then put colon.
So that's testing now for the value of
one, so that's equivalent of doing,
if switch value equals, equals one,
we then type in the code that we
want to execute if the value is one,
so I can put value was one.
Like so.
We then type in the break keyword.
And what break does, is it terminates
the enclosing switch statement, and
control continues at the line
after the switch block.
So I'll type break, like so.
Based on that, what's gonna happen is
when the code is executed for one,
it's gonna print out System.out.printline,
value was one, break,
which means it's then gonna come down
to here and start executing any other
code that we had sort of after
here from this point onwards.
More code here.
So in other words it would break, would
come down to here and continue processing.
Now we can use modable cases, we can
put another one, we can talk case two.
Value was two.
And we're talking break again.
Underr that circumstance, we also wanna
break out of that switch statement.
And the final equivalent to
the L statement, which is, but
we want to do a test for
all other circumstances.
We don't type else,
we type another keyword, default.
And default means at any other case
that's not been covered above,
this is what I want you to do.
So in that case we would put,
Was not one or two.
Then we do a final break as well.
So that's the switch statement.
And we can run that.
I'm sure you can see here, value was one.
And just to confirm it, we'll actually
comment out this other code for now,
because we don't need
the int code anymore.
Just so we know, we're getting
the values from the right place.
Valuables one.
Valuables was two.
We do a test for valuables two and
of course valuables three.
That's good so
you can see that's all working.
So that's a switch statement.
Now it's often a matter of style
to choose the if statement or
the switch statement because both
can really achieve the same thing.
You can see that we used if the value
equals, equals one effectively is
equivalent to using a switch statement and
putting case one.
The if statement is a little bit more
flexible in that each time we do a test
here, we don't have to use
the same Test criteria.
So we could put if value equals one,
else if cat equals four.
In other words,
a different variable altogether.
In the case of the switch statement,
we're testing only the switch value here.
And we're testing different values for
that same value.
So we can actually then introduce
a different variable type to test for
argument's sake.
We're just testing this one variable
here with this switch statement.
So a switch is good to use if you're
actually testing the same variable
you wanna test different values for
that variable.
Now you can see that there would
be situations where if you had
20 values to test for,
this could get a little bit tedious so
there is actually a bit of a shortcut.
What we can do is we can type case three,
case four,
case five and
then we could put something like,
was a three, or four, or five.
Right?
So it was assigned three to
the value of switch value.
Previously, that was not one or two but
now, it shouldn't hit this default because
we've added a case here for
the number three.
So it should actually execute in there.
So if you're on that,
was it three, or four, or five?
And of course, you wanted to know what
the value was if you wanted to do some
calculation in here,
we can put something like.
Actually it was,
I switch value because we know what
the switch value is so we can run that.
So you could still actually process
that so you could have a case here for
case three, four, five, six,
seven, eight, nine, or ten.
We could still do some calculation based
on the actual value of switch value.
The important thing is here,
we're grouping model
case tests together in the one line
effectively which makes it a lot easier.
Now one of the important things to note
here is the use of the break keyword.
If you don't have this break,
you don't create a break statement.
In other words,
you'll get unpredictable results.
Now just to show what will
happen is I'm gonna remove or
we're going to comment
out this break here.
And if I run this,
bearing in mind what happened before.
We saw two lines of output.
If we run this now,
now can you see what's happened there?
So it was a three, or four, or five.
Actually was a three.
Was not one or two.
So why has that happened?
Well the reason it's happened is,
we've taken out this break statement, so
what's happened is
the processing got to here.
Based on the fact that the switch
value was set to three in this case.
So I executed those two lines and
printed those both out.
But then there wasn't a break statement,
so it continued on to this line here.
And then eventually did a break
to get out of the code.
Consequently you can see that breaks are
vital to close off your case comparison,
your case test if you will.
If you don't do that the output will
fall through to the next case and
continue on until it finds another break,
if any, or
until it finishes off
the switch statement.
So this is a common error that you'll find
in code, that forgetting to put a break.
You might have everything else correct and
you'll find you get really
weird unpredictable results.
You might be assuming in this case
it's only gonna execute this code, but
it's moved down and
executed that other code.
And in a worse case scenario, see that,
we'll get rid of it, so we'll comment
out that break, and that one, and
we'll the switch value to one, run that.
You can see we've got all these values,
that's process one,
process two, process case three,
four and five and the default.
So its' processed everything
because there were no breaks.
So make sure that you do introduce to
add those breaks, it's very important.
So I'll just add those back.
And we'll run it again to
confirm it's working again.
Oops and I undid that, so
I should make it a one again.
It was one second in.
It's now working with the break statement.
Technically speaking, this last break,
cuz at the end it's the last thing we're
testing for, we could take that out.
And to be precise we can put here
what's now one, two, three, or
five since we're testing for
those above now.
That will work.
Oops.
Three, four, or five.
That will now work because it's
the last line of the switch statement
anyway, and then it will breakout.
So, technically,
you don't need that one there.
But it's always good to be precise in your
code, so I recommend you leave that in
that circumstance because it's very clear,
that what you're trying to achieve.
And possibly a programmer, who's perhaps
new, or doesn't know a lot about your
system might look at that and go,
I wonder why he didn't add a break there.
So just introducing a question you
don't need to be introduced, so
I would suggest you
always add breaks anyway.
So with older versions of Java, we were
able to use here for this switch value,
we were able to use the primitive
types byte, short, char, and
as you can see I've used int here as well.
Okay, so that's the switch statement.
And what I'm gonna do now is
just set you a challenge.
You'll go through that challenge,
and I'm just gonna finish off and
just show you another little
scenario with a switch.
I just mentioned that the switch statement
can be used with four primitive types,
byte, short, char, and int.
So let's do a challenge based on that.
Here's the challenge.
Okay, so your test is to create a new
switch statement using char primitive type
instead of an int.
So you need to create a new char
variable and set it to some value.
Then you need to create
the switch statement, but
this time you'll be testing for
the values a, b, c, d, or e in the cases.
Display a message if any of
these are found, and then break.
And add a default or something in which
displays a message saying that a, b,
c, d or e was not typed.
All right, go ahead and
do that and pause the video now.
And when you're finished, come back and
you can check out my solution.
Okay how did you get on?
Did you figure it out?
But actually the code is very
similar to what you've got above but
we've just really changing data type.
So it's really just a case
of putting char and
we'll call it marchar value and
let's set it to an initial value of a.
So the switch statement.
I mentioned that's compatible with char.
So we can talk char value.
So that's exactly the same, but
it's just specifying the char value,
instead of the switch value we used above,
which was an int.
And the case, will be case single quote a,
because that's how we define a char,
with single quotes.
column and out.
A was found, add a break.
And then we can do the same with b for
example.
And if one or two,
we can also input case c,
d, or e in single quotes.
We could put
We're just going to put what it
actually was found, and print it.
You're gonna break.
And whoops,
we need to use the case keyword again,
which I forgot to add there.
Case, case like so.
And we'll put a break there.
Then the default will be,
Something like I could not find a,
b, c, d, or e.
And break.
All right so let's give that a go.
We've got the value a that we've defined,
so
we should get a message
saying a was found.
A was found so
we can change the value to b.
B was found and let's just try d, knowing
that that's part of the c, d and e test.
d was found, and we can put
something like a, like a g there.
Could not find a, b, c, d, or e.
So that's how they use char, the primitive
type char in a switch statement.
The last thing before we finished,
in JDK version seven, java version seven.
They added the capability of using
the switch statement with strings.
And that's why at the start of the video I
wanted you to check to make sure that you
selected the right type there
because if you haven't,
you'll get an error at this point.
So do refer back to the start of the video
if you get an error at this point trying
to get a switch statement to work.
So we can also do something like
switch month equals January.
You can do switch.
Month, Like so.
And we can do a case.
Break, so we'll just do one more.
We won't go through all 12 months.
We'll just say June, my birthday month.
Jun, abbreviate, Okay, and
then we'll just do a break
Default is, we'll just put not sure.
Okay, so we run that.
January report being returned there.
Then we can do a search for
June, winter June I should say.
Here we get June,
let me put something else,
some random characters, Not sure,
okay, so that's working.
But there's another problem here.
What happens if we type, January.
And you noticed I've typed all
in lower case, we run that.
Not sure.
This is because technically the string
January with a lower case j as
the first letter is different to
the string January with an upper case J.
We saw this a little bit earlier on with
primitive types when we're looking at ints
and doubles and so
forth how there are differences, so
you need to be precise here.
Computers are precise.
So you really need to make
sure you test this correctly.
So how do we get around this
problem while making sure,
cuz obviously we wouldn't
wanna do a case statement
to put something like case January,
case January, case.
January and so on.
We don't wanna be doing that test for
every possible scenario,
every possible combination of upper and
lower case letters that we type.
That would be like a crazy amount of work
and would really blow out the code and
wouldn't be a good solution.
The way we get around that Is we
use the method that's included with
a string called two, lower.
So what we do is we change our test,
we put two, lower case.
I'm typing dot two lowercase you
can see there's a two lowercase.
I enter that there.
That's actually a method that
is part of the string class.
I know I've talked a few times about
class and said that it is coming and
it is certainly coming.
But we really need to go through some of
these basic points first before we start
looking at classes which is some of
the more advanced features of Java so for
now just think that two lower case
is a method that is part of Java
attached to the string class which
enables to perform some functionality.
So what that two lowercase does, it just
converts the entire string to lower case
so if we enter something like January.
So if we enter that and actually run this,
and then we make sure that our tests,
we're actually testing for
the lowercase version now.
And the reason we wanna test for
the lowercase is, in this line here
we've converted it to lowercase.
So we actually said, from this point on,
I want the switch statement to be whatever
was typed into month,
but all in lowercase.
So therefore, the cases are only
gonna work If everything's
entered in lower case.
So first we'll confirm it works, and
I'll just show you what
happened if we didn't do that.
You can see that January is now working,
and I can put something like,
really any combination of letters, it's
going to convert everything to lower case.
So you can see that's working.
But if we didn't put
a lower case test here.
We run it,
we'll find that that doesn't work.
And that's because this has
got an uppercase letter, but
this test is all in lowercase.
We've converted that all to lowercase.
Obviously need to make sure that
you're actually testing the lowercase.
So that's a method that's part of
the string class, as I mentioned.
And we'll be talking
more about that later.
And it's got lots of actually
different methods to string class.
it's really very versatile.
We can put two upper.
Two upper case in which case we'd
have to do a test on upper case.
So run that.
You can see that it's working.
So that's the switch statement.
I suspect you'll use that
reasonably often, in your code.
It's something that you'll
see in a lot of java code,
it's very common to use, very versatile.
So that's it for this video.
In the next video we're going to
talk about the for statement, and
figure out how to provide looping
capabilities for our java code.